docs/README.md, before:

# Documentation

This document is a guide to developing in Jupiter. By reading it you should gain an
understanding of how to develop in this project, and should have a working dev environment
that allows you to do said development.

## Naming

Across this project we'll use Jupiter as the codename for the project. Anything technical
or non-user facing will use this name. Conversely, Thrive should just appear in the
application copy, images, legal material, etc.

## Prepare For Development

Checkout `scripts/setup-for-dev.sh`. It outlines the tools you need to have in order to
develop Jupiter. It's a pretty standard Node & Python development setup. A modern IDE is
implied, though no particular brand is assumed.

After a `git clone jupiter ~/Work/jupiter` kind of setup, you should also run the following:

```bash
% ./scripts/setup-for-dev.sh
```

This will set things up locally inside the local repository for the dev tools we use.
This is Python and Node right now. A venv is created, and a bunch of linters and checkers
are installed. Also all the dependencies from pypi and npm. Where possible, everything
is installed for the local repository, but there are some installed globally via brew.

## A Development Session

When you want to develop a new feature or bugfix you need to activate the new dev
session from a shell first. Then there's some small ceremony about creating a feature branch for the work (see below).

```bash
% source ./scripts/work/new-dev-session.sh
# Set everything up in the Python and Node settings
% ./scripts/work/new-feature work-on-something
# Creates branch feature/work-on-something and switch to it
```

Finally there's commands for running a local instance of Jupiter.

```bash
% ./scripts/run-dev.sh a-test
```

This will start the instance with the name `a-test`. If ommited, the standard name `dev`
is used. You can start as many as you want, and they live independently (use different
DBs, different ports, etc.). You can watch the overview of the started processes and their
logs for easier debugging. Though `npx pm2 logs` is also useful here.

For quick checks you can run `./scripts/fast-lint.sh`. And for the whole test-suite with
linters, type checkers, unit tests, integration tests, etc. you can run `make check` (it'll take a couple minutes).

When you're finished you can run:

```bash
./scripts/close-feature.sh
```

This will perform all ceremonies, merge the branch correctly into `main` and push to GitHub.

> A note on using `./scripts/work/new-feature.sh`, `./scripts/work/new-bugfix.sh`, and other
counterparts: we want to keep hygene of the `main` branch to have a linear history of
features and bugfixes, ocassionally tagged with releases. To enforce these, there's no
straight coding on the `main` branch, and the helper scripts help you setup things
in the right way.

## Environments

The Jupiter infrastructure has a rather crips notion of environments. They operate
on two levels: system and feature.

System environments are the names we give for the code in various distances relative
to users and developers. Code can look at the `Env` enum to understand what environment
they are in.

* There is the `production` environment of which there is only one, and which consists
  of the totality of machines, cloud resources, SaaS services, etc. which handle
  the user data, the user interactions, etc. Crucially this also includes the distributed
  clients that are the `cli` app, the `MacOS` app, the `iOS` and `Android` apps, and
  the code running in all the browsers where the app is running like that. So it's both
  machines we own, and ones our customers own! The code running here corresponds
  to the code at `main:latest` or `main:vX.Y` depending on the distribution model.
  This is considered a `live` environment because it is accessible for users.
* There is the `staging` environmenet of which there can be many, and which are used
  by developers to showcase their work. Every time you create a PR, you also create
  a `staging` environment that runs the code in your particular branch. You can build
  and distribute client apps based on this version too. This is also considered a
  `live` environment because it is accessible to users.
* There is the `dev` enviroment of which there can be many, and which are the ones
  developers create when they're running their work on their dev machines. Every
  time you run `./scripts/run-dev.sh` you're creating/using such an environment.
  This is not considered `local` environment because it is not accessible to users.

Feature environments are a subset of `dev` and `staging` environments. When you specificy a
particular name in `./scripts/run-dev.sh <your-name>` you create such an env for example,
or reuse if you created it before. When you open a PR, the same happens but in a `live`
setting. These environments are separate between each other, and start in a blank but valid state.

## Apps

Another important concept is that of _apps_. These are the programs or
systems through which users actually interact with the system.

Conceptually apps are a combination of two things: a core and a shell.
The core encapsulates something fundamental about how a user interacts,
whereas the shell describes the way the core is packaged for interaction,
typically bound to a certain notion of a platform.

Physically, most code will be in the core. The shell just orchestrates
this interaction and is aware of the platform specifics.

Presently there are two cores:

* The CLI app - an app users can use from a command line
* The WebUI app - a typical web based app, with a GUI and available
  over the network.

There are several shells:

* CLI - which corresponds to the CLI core, wrapped as a typical
  command line app, where you write commands one at a time.
* Browser - the WebUI core delivered as a webapp at a well known
  web address.
* Desktop Electron - the WebUI delivered as a desktop app for
  Linux, MacOS, and Windows, via their respective distribution
  mechanism.
* Mobile Capacitor - the WebUI delivered as mobile apps for iOS
  and Android, via their respective distribution mechanism.
* Mobile PWA - the WebUI delivered as mobile apps via PWA.

Another piece of associated information is platform. Presently there are:

* Desktop - the default platform really. Can be any shell.
* Mobile iOS - a mobile device running iOS. Can only be Mobile Capacitor
  or Mobie PWA shells.
* Tablet iOS - a tablet device running iOS. Can only be Mobile Capacitor
  or Mobie PWA shells.
* Mobile Android - a mobile device running Android. Can only be Mobile Capacitor
  or Mobie PWA shells.
* Tablet Android - a tablet device running Android. Can only be Mobile Capacitor
  or Mobie PWA shells.

On top of this there are also distributions (rather like channels):

* Web - the app is presented over the web. For Browsers only.
* Mac Web - the app is downloaded as a `dmg` archive from a website
  (presently GitHub releases). Installs from a 3rd party. For Desktop Electron
  only on Desktop platform.
* Mac Store - the app is downloaded from the Mac Store. For Desktop Electron
  only on Desktop platform.
* App Store - the app is downloaded from the App Store. For Mobile Capacitor
  only on Mobile iOS and Tablet iOS platforms.
* Google Play Store - the app is downloaded from the Google App Store.
  For Mobile Capacitor only on Mobile Android and Tablet Android platforms.

### Going Deeper On App Shells

The client app consists of the app core and the shell. Looking at the web side,
where this thing is more clear, there is something that the shell does.

* The mobile shell actually consists of a small number of webpages that are baked
  into the app and that are the things that the capacitor webview is going to load
  initially. THere's an `index.html` and an `error.html` page. These serve two
  purposes.
  * First: they take the environment configuration and pass it to the core, in a way
    that capacitor currently doesn't.
  * Second: the `index.html` shows a splash screen type-thing and simply reloads to
    the remote server address. But if there's an error, there's a redirect to `error.html`
    that allows a user to see an error has occurred and retry.
  Together these give some control to the local app without having to rely on the
  remote thing to exist (and ditto a network connection to exist, etc.).
* On desktop the logic is the same, but Electron can do a bit more setup in the
  native side, and can pass more "ready made" data to the client.

## Running Tests

The full test suite is run via `make check`. This runs linters, type checkers, and
various test batteriess on all the sources, config files, etc.

There is `./scripts/fast-lint.sh` that runs just the linters and type checkers and
is used for quicker feedback on the changes that you're doing. Most of the info
here is given by various IDE tooling (which in the case of VS Code is configured
to use the same configs as the CLI tooling). But the one produced by `fast-lint`
is both complete and authoritative.

We aim to keep this under 30 seconds.

## Fixing Issues

Run `make fix-style` to fix many linting issues.

### Integration Tests

Jupiter has a large battery of integration tests that look at all aspects of the
application and its functionality, typically on the happy paths.

To run these specifically you can use `./scripts/run-itests.sh`. A typical invocation
might be:

`./scripts/run-itests.sh dev -k my_test_prefix`

This starts a distinct dev feature environment and opens a browser intstrumented for
testing. You'll see a typical test result from this one.

Tests are written in `Python` with `pytest` and `playwright`.

## Releases

Jupiter has a notion of versions, represented by releases. These mark specific
code versions, and the associated "release entities" for them (typically packaged apps).

The main Jupiter system has a continuous deployment release model. Every piece
of work that gets created via `./scripts/work/new-feature|new-bugfix` triggers a
a release to production - `webui` and `webapi` and `docs` and the others are thus
handled. Ditto, every PR also is pushed immediately to a staging environment.

Other sorts of artifacts - the `cli` and `desktop` apps (and in the future, the
`ios`, `android`, `linux`, etc. ones) have a coarser grained release process,
marked by releases.

Releases are named in semver fashion. We are currently at `v1.x.x` and plan
on staying on major `1` for a long time.

In terms of representation:

* On Git/GitHub, releases are marked by tags of the form `vx.y.x`.
* Ditto, the `master` branch is built such that it has one PR for each release.
  The `develop` branch tracks incremental releases of features and bugfixes.
* GitHub Releases are used to hold the artefacts produced by each release
  (source code, app packages).
* Releases can imply an app store upload too, but not necessarily. The platform
  apps are built with Electron and are thin shells around the web app. So the
  need for updating them, even as infrequent as releases isn't as big.

In terms of working:

* To create a release use `./scripts/release/new.sh x.y.z`.
* You'll need to edit `src/docs/material/releases/release-x.y.z.md` with the
  release notes. And update `mkdocs.yaml` to include it.
* Also run a `make stats-for-nerds` to include some per-release info.
* Then run `./scripts/release/finish.sh` to finish everything about the
  release on GitHub size.
* You can run `./scripts/build/desktop.sh` to build the new version of the
  desktop apps.
* And then `./scripts/release/gh-release.sh x.y.z` to create a new release
  on GitHub.
* Finally, if you so with you can upload to the AppStore via
  `./scripts/release/appstore-upload-(ios|macos).sh x.y.z`. As mentioned above, not
  always necessary.

We'll work to unify these more in the future, but for now they're manual
operations that you can chose to do or not do.

For humans, these are useful too. The documentation has links to release notes,
which are useful for folks.

## Release Management

There is a new release banner. Helps you reload the app if there's a new
named version, or even download it if there's no app stores releases.

It depends on scripts in `./scripts/release` to prepare the right
release manifest (a `release-manifest.json` file) on GitHub releases.
This means we're depending "live" on this system.

It has some tricky logic to it.

## Some Tricky Aspects

There's some trickyness that's easy to miss.

* URL handlers: when the app is used via the desktop and mobile shells
  registers itself to open URLs starting via "jupiter://".
* The logic of when to open the app:
  * When in the Browser shell, there's a link to download the platform
    shells. This looks at the current platform and builds the appropriate
    link to download the app.
  * But it also has a "jupiter://" link to open directly if there's
    something there.
* Frontdoor is used by shells as the initial entry point. They can pass
  in shell specific data here, and frondoor stores them in a way that's
  accessible to the rest of the app. Not entering through the frontdoor
  means that the assumptions will be made by the system (ie you're a browser).
* `render-fix` is a special view in `webui`. We're handling some sort of React
  hydration error because of mismatches in SSR and client-side rendering.
  These mostly occur because of the many time manipulations we do client-side.
  Which might differ from what's happening server-side, if we're not careful
  or even if there's noticeable clock skew between the client's machine
  and the server. If this happens, Remix tends to crash hard - styles are
  messed up. To prevent this we force a client-side reload to a
  very safe page. Which then does a Remix reload to the final page.
  We're gonna log this at some point.

Commit message:

Fix the redirect wonkiness of frontdoor

docs/README.md, after:

# Documentation

This document is a guide to developing in Jupiter. By reading it you should gain an
understanding of how to develop in this project, and should have a working dev environment
that allows you to do said development.

## Naming

Across this project we'll use Jupiter as the codename for the project. Anything technical
or non-user facing will use this name. Conversely, Thrive should just appear in the
application copy, images, legal material, etc.

## Prepare For Development

Checkout `scripts/setup-for-dev.sh`. It outlines the tools you need to have in order to
develop Jupiter. It's a pretty standard Node & Python development setup. A modern IDE is
implied, though no particular brand is assumed.

After a `git clone jupiter ~/Work/jupiter` kind of setup, you should also run the following:

```bash
% ./scripts/setup-for-dev.sh
```

This will set things up locally inside the local repository for the dev tools we use.
This is Python and Node right now. A venv is created, and a bunch of linters and checkers
are installed. Also all the dependencies from pypi and npm. Where possible, everything
is installed for the local repository, but there are some installed globally via brew.

## A Development Session

When you want to develop a new feature or bugfix you need to activate the new dev
session from a shell first. Then there's some small ceremony about creating a feature branch for the work (see below).

```bash
% source ./scripts/work/new-dev-session.sh
# Set everything up in the Python and Node settings
% ./scripts/work/new-feature work-on-something
# Creates branch feature/work-on-something and switch to it
```

Finally there's commands for running a local instance of Jupiter.

```bash
% ./scripts/run-dev.sh a-test
```

This will start the instance with the name `a-test`. If ommited, the standard name `dev`
is used. You can start as many as you want, and they live independently (use different
DBs, different ports, etc.). You can watch the overview of the started processes and their
logs for easier debugging. Though `npx pm2 logs` is also useful here.

For quick checks you can run `./scripts/fast-lint.sh`. And for the whole test-suite with
linters, type checkers, unit tests, integration tests, etc. you can run `make check` (it'll take a couple minutes).

When you're finished you can run:

```bash
./scripts/close-feature.sh
```

This will perform all ceremonies, merge the branch correctly into `main` and push to GitHub.

> A note on using `./scripts/work/new-feature.sh`, `./scripts/work/new-bugfix.sh`, and other
counterparts: we want to keep hygene of the `main` branch to have a linear history of
features and bugfixes, ocassionally tagged with releases. To enforce these, there's no
straight coding on the `main` branch, and the helper scripts help you setup things
in the right way.

## Environments

The Jupiter infrastructure has a rather crips notion of environments. They operate
on two levels: system and feature.

System environments are the names we give for the code in various distances relative
to users and developers. Code can look at the `Env` enum to understand what environment
they are in.

* There is the `production` environment of which there is only one, and which consists
  of the totality of machines, cloud resources, SaaS services, etc. which handle
  the user data, the user interactions, etc. Crucially this also includes the distributed
  clients that are the `cli` app, the `MacOS` app, the `iOS` and `Android` apps, and
  the code running in all the browsers where the app is running like that. So it's both
  machines we own, and ones our customers own! The code running here corresponds
  to the code at `main:latest` or `main:vX.Y` depending on the distribution model.
  This is considered a `live` environment because it is accessible for users.
* There is the `staging` environmenet of which there can be many, and which are used
  by developers to showcase their work. Every time you create a PR, you also create
  a `staging` environment that runs the code in your particular branch. You can build
  and distribute client apps based on this version too. This is also considered a
  `live` environment because it is accessible to users.
* There is the `dev` enviroment of which there can be many, and which are the ones
  developers create when they're running their work on their dev machines. Every
  time you run `./scripts/run-dev.sh` you're creating/using such an environment.
  This is not considered `local` environment because it is not accessible to users.

Feature environments are a subset of `dev` and `staging` environments. When you specificy a
particular name in `./scripts/run-dev.sh <your-name>` you create such an env for example,
or reuse if you created it before. When you open a PR, the same happens but in a `live`
setting. These environments are separate between each other, and start in a blank but valid state.

## Apps

Another important concept is that of _apps_. These are the programs or
systems through which users actually interact with the system.

Conceptually apps are a combination of two things: a core and a shell.
The core encapsulates something fundamental about how a user interacts,
whereas the shell describes the way the core is packaged for interaction,
typically bound to a certain notion of a platform.

Physically, most code will be in the core. The shell just orchestrates
this interaction and is aware of the platform specifics.

Presently there are two cores:

* The CLI app - an app users can use from a command line
* The WebUI app - a typical web based app, with a GUI and available
  over the network.

There are several shells:

* CLI - which corresponds to the CLI core, wrapped as a typical
  command line app, where you write commands one at a time.
* Browser - the WebUI core delivered as a webapp at a well known
  web address.
* Desktop Electron - the WebUI delivered as a desktop app for
  Linux, MacOS, and Windows, via their respective distribution
  mechanism.
* Mobile Capacitor - the WebUI delivered as mobile apps for iOS
  and Android, via their respective distribution mechanism.
* Mobile PWA - the WebUI delivered as mobile apps via PWA.

Another piece of associated information is platform. Presently there are:

* Desktop - the default platform really. Can be any shell.
* Mobile iOS - a mobile device running iOS. Can only be Mobile Capacitor
  or Mobie PWA shells.
* Tablet iOS - a tablet device running iOS. Can only be Mobile Capacitor
  or Mobie PWA shells.
* Mobile Android - a mobile device running Android. Can only be Mobile Capacitor
  or Mobie PWA shells.
* Tablet Android - a tablet device running Android. Can only be Mobile Capacitor
  or Mobie PWA shells.

On top of this there are also distributions (rather like channels):

* Web - the app is presented over the web. For Browsers only.
* Mac Web - the app is downloaded as a `dmg` archive from a website
  (presently GitHub releases). Installs from a 3rd party. For Desktop Electron
  only on Desktop platform.
* Mac Store - the app is downloaded from the Mac Store. For Desktop Electron
  only on Desktop platform.
* App Store - the app is downloaded from the App Store. For Mobile Capacitor
  only on Mobile iOS and Tablet iOS platforms.
* Google Play Store - the app is downloaded from the Google App Store.
  For Mobile Capacitor only on Mobile Android and Tablet Android platforms.

### Going Deeper On App Shells

The client app consists of the app core and the shell. Looking at the web side,
where this thing is more clear, there is something that the shell does.

* The mobile shell actually consists of a small number of webpages that are baked
  into the app and that are the things that the capacitor webview is going to load
  initially. THere's an `index.html` and an `error.html` page. These serve two
  purposes.
  * First: they take the environment configuration and pass it to the core, in a way
    that capacitor currently doesn't.
  * Second: the `index.html` shows a splash screen type-thing and simply reloads to
    the remote server address. But if there's an error, there's a redirect to `error.html`
    that allows a user to see an error has occurred and retry.
  Together these give some control to the local app without having to rely on the
  remote thing to exist (and ditto a network connection to exist, etc.).
* On desktop the logic is the same, but Electron can do a bit more setup in the
  native side, and can pass more "ready made" data to the client.

## Running Tests

The full test suite is run via `make check`. This runs linters, type checkers, and
various test batteriess on all the sources, config files, etc.

There is `./scripts/fast-lint.sh` that runs just the linters and type checkers and
is used for quicker feedback on the changes that you're doing. Most of the info
here is given by various IDE tooling (which in the case of VS Code is configured
to use the same configs as the CLI tooling). But the one produced by `fast-lint`
is both complete and authoritative.

We aim to keep this under 30 seconds.

## Fixing Issues

Run `make fix-style` to fix many linting issues.

### Integration Tests

Jupiter has a large battery of integration tests that look at all aspects of the
application and its functionality, typically on the happy paths.

To run these specifically you can use `./scripts/run-itests.sh`. A typical invocation
might be:

`./scripts/run-itests.sh dev -k my_test_prefix`

This starts a distinct dev feature environment and opens a browser intstrumented for
testing. You'll see a typical test result from this one.

Tests are written in `Python` with `pytest` and `playwright`.

## Releases

Jupiter has a notion of versions, represented by releases. These mark specific
code versions, and the associated "release entities" for them (typically packaged apps).

The main Jupiter system has a continuous deployment release model. Every piece
of work that gets created via `./scripts/work/new-feature|new-bugfix` triggers a
a release to production - `webui` and `webapi` and `docs` and the others are thus
handled. Ditto, every PR also is pushed immediately to a staging environment.

Other sorts of artifacts - the `cli` and `desktop` apps (and in the future, the
`ios`, `android`, `linux`, etc. ones) have a coarser grained release process,
marked by releases.

Releases are named in semver fashion. We are currently at `v1.x.x` and plan
on staying on major `1` for a long time.

In terms of representation:

* On Git/GitHub, releases are marked by tags of the form `vx.y.x`.
* Ditto, the `master` branch is built such that it has one PR for each release.
  The `develop` branch tracks incremental releases of features and bugfixes.
* GitHub Releases are used to hold the artefacts produced by each release
  (source code, app packages).
* Releases can imply an app store upload too, but not necessarily. The platform
  apps are built with Electron and are thin shells around the web app. So the
  need for updating them, even as infrequent as releases isn't as big.

In terms of working:

* To create a release use `./scripts/release/new.sh x.y.z`.
* You'll need to edit `src/docs/material/releases/release-x.y.z.md` with the
  release notes. And update `mkdocs.yaml` to include it.
* Also run a `make stats-for-nerds` to include some per-release info.
* Then run `./scripts/release/finish.sh` to finish everything about the
  release on GitHub size.
* You can run `./scripts/build/desktop.sh` to build the new version of the
  desktop apps.
* And then `./scripts/release/gh-release.sh x.y.z` to create a new release
  on GitHub.
* Finally, if you so with you can upload to the AppStore via
  `./scripts/release/appstore-upload-(ios|macos).sh x.y.z`. As mentioned above, not
  always necessary.

We'll work to unify these more in the future, but for now they're manual
operations that you can chose to do or not do.

For humans, these are useful too. The documentation has links to release notes,
which are useful for folks.

## Release Management

There is a new release banner. Helps you reload the app if there's a new
named version, or even download it if there's no app stores releases.

It depends on scripts in `./scripts/release` to prepare the right
release manifest (a `release-manifest.json` file) on GitHub releases.
This means we're depending "live" on this system.

It has some tricky logic to it.

## Some Tricky Aspects

There's some trickyness that's easy to miss.

* URL handlers: when the app is used via the desktop and mobile shells
  registers itself to open URLs starting via "jupiter://".
* The logic of when to open the app:
  * When in the Browser shell, there's a link to download the platform
    shells. This looks at the current platform and builds the appropriate
    link to download the app.
  * But it also has a "jupiter://" link to open directly if there's
    something there.
* Frontdoor is used by shells as the initial entry point. They can pass
  in shell specific data here, and frondoor stores them in a way that's
  accessible to the rest of the app. Not entering through the frontdoor
  means that the assumptions will be made by the system (ie you're a browser).
  There's a bunch of trickiness here. Frontdoor is the first URL a shell
  accesses, and it does a hard redirect to a static page (outside Remix's control)
  called frontdoor-redirect-hack-{something}.html that then meta redirects to
  something like `/app/workspace`. The reason for this is wonky handling of
  cookies on redirects in browsers (ie the redirected URL will not see the new
  cookies that frondoor sets). Checkout https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4694089/sending-browser-cookies-during-a-302-redirect for more details.
* `render-fix` is a special view in `webui`. We're handling some sort of React
  hydration error because of mismatches in SSR and client-side rendering.
  These mostly occur because of the many time manipulations we do client-side.
  Which might differ from what's happening server-side, if we're not careful
  or even if there's noticeable clock skew between the client's machine
  and the server. If this happens, Remix tends to crash hard - styles are
  messed up. To prevent this we force a client-side reload to a
  very safe page. Which then does a Remix reload to the final page.
  We're gonna log this at some point.
